README.md, before:

# TranslateGemma Local

Local translation UI for `google/translategemma-4b-it` running on llama.cpp.

## What this does

- Starts a thin adapter API that forwards text translation requests to llama.cpp.
- If llama.cpp is not running, it auto-starts with:
  `llama-server -hf mradermacher/translategemma-4b-it-GGUF:Q6_K --jinja -c 0 --host 127.0.0.1 --port 8033 --flash-attn on`
- Serves a Next.js web UI on `http://127.0.0.1:3000`.

## Run locally

Prerequisites:

- Install `llama.cpp` and ensure `llama-server` is available (or set `LLAMA_SERVER_CMD`).
- Download a GGUF build of TranslateGemma from
  `https://huggingface.co/mradermacher/translategemma-4b-it-GGUF` and choose a
  quantization that fits your VRAM.

### What is TranslateGemma (Gemma 3 Translate)?

TranslateGemma is a translation-focused variant of the Gemma 3 family released by
Google. It is optimized for text translation across 55 languages and is small
enough to run locally with the right quantization.

### Windows quick start

- Install or build `llama.cpp` for Windows and locate `llama-server.exe`.
- Set `LLAMA_SERVER_CMD` if `llama-server.exe` is not on your PATH.
- Place the downloaded GGUF file somewhere accessible or let `llama.cpp` pull it
  via the `-hf` flag (default in this project).

### Linux quick start

- Build or install `llama.cpp` and ensure `llama-server` is on your PATH.
- If `llama-server` is not on PATH, set `LLAMA_SERVER_CMD` to its full path.
- Use the GGUF model from the Hugging Face link above and select the quant
  matching your GPU memory.

1) Install dependencies:
```bash
npm install
```

2) Start the app:
```bash
npm run dev
```

The UI will load while the model boots. The first translation may take a minute.

## UI notes

- Streaming is enabled by default for faster feedback.
- Light/dark theme toggle is in the header.
- The language list is a curated 55-language set in `shared/languages.js` and can be edited if needed.
- Input length is capped based on the 2K token context window to avoid truncated outputs.
- Long text mode splits large inputs into sentence-sized chunks, streams each chunk, and merges the results.
- Prompt mode defaults to plain text instructions for compatibility; set `LLAMA_PROMPT_MODE=structured` to use the model's structured template.

## Environment options

- `LLAMA_HOST` (default: `127.0.0.1`)
- `LLAMA_PORT` (default: `8033`)
- `LLAMA_MODEL` (default: `mradermacher/translategemma-4b-it-GGUF:Q6_K`)
- `LLAMA_SERVER_CMD` (default: `C:\llama cpp\llama-server.exe` on Windows if it exists, otherwise `llama-server`)
- `LLAMA_SERVER_ARGS` (optional override for all args)
- `LLAMA_SERVER_URL` (optional override for the full base URL)
- `PORT` (default: `3000`)
- `LLAMA_PROMPT_MODE` (default: `plain`, set to `structured` to send the TranslateGemma structured content payload)
- `NEXT_TELEMETRY_DISABLED` (default: `1` to avoid Next.js version checks in offline mode)
- `LLAMA_CONTEXT_TOKENS` (default: `2048`)
- `LLAMA_MAX_OUTPUT_TOKENS` (default: `512`)
- `LLAMA_PROMPT_OVERHEAD_TOKENS` (default: `120`)

## Translation contract

The adapter sends the TranslateGemma-specific chat template:
- `role: "user"`
- `content`: list of exactly one item
- item includes `type`, `source_lang_code`, `target_lang_code`, and `text`

## Image translation (not enabled yet)

The model supports image inputs, but the adapter and UI are text-only until
llama.cpp accepts the vision projector and image payloads end-to-end.
Once available, the adapter can pass `type: "image"` with a `url` payload.

## Known limits

- Text-only mode; image translation is not wired yet.
- 2K context window is enforced; long inputs must be chunked.
- Output cleanup strips model control tokens and common prefixes; if a case is missed, adjust `shared/sanitize.js`.
- Prompt mode defaults to `plain`; use `LLAMA_PROMPT_MODE=structured` if your llama.cpp build supports the structured template.

Commit message:

Add fastText auto-detect support

README.md, after:

# TranslateGemma Local

Local translation UI for `google/translategemma-4b-it` running on llama.cpp.

## What this does

- Starts a thin adapter API that forwards text translation requests to llama.cpp.
- If llama.cpp is not running, it auto-starts with:
  `llama-server -hf mradermacher/translategemma-4b-it-GGUF:Q6_K --jinja -c 0 --host 127.0.0.1 --port 8033 --flash-attn on`
- Serves a Next.js web UI on `http://127.0.0.1:3000`.

## Run locally

Prerequisites:

- Install `llama.cpp` and ensure `llama-server` is available (or set `LLAMA_SERVER_CMD`).
- Download a GGUF build of TranslateGemma from
  `https://huggingface.co/mradermacher/translategemma-4b-it-GGUF` and choose a
  quantization that fits your VRAM.
- Optional: install the fastText CLI and download the language ID model
  (`lid.176.bin`) if you want auto language detection.

### What is TranslateGemma (Gemma 3 Translate)?

TranslateGemma is a translation-focused variant of the Gemma 3 family released by
Google. It is optimized for text translation across 55 languages and is small
enough to run locally with the right quantization.

### Windows quick start

- Install or build `llama.cpp` for Windows and locate `llama-server.exe`.
- Set `LLAMA_SERVER_CMD` if `llama-server.exe` is not on your PATH.
- Place the downloaded GGUF file somewhere accessible or let `llama.cpp` pull it
  via the `-hf` flag (default in this project).

### Linux quick start

- Build or install `llama.cpp` and ensure `llama-server` is on your PATH.
- If `llama-server` is not on PATH, set `LLAMA_SERVER_CMD` to its full path.
- Use the GGUF model from the Hugging Face link above and select the quant
  matching your GPU memory.

### Auto language detection (fastText LID)

This app can auto-detect the source language using fastText. To enable it:

- Install the fastText CLI, or install the Python wheel and use the included
  wrapper at `scripts/fasttext.cmd`.
- Download `lid.176.bin` from `https://fasttext.cc/docs/en/language-identification.html`.
- Set `FASTTEXT_MODEL` to the full path of `lid.176.bin`.
- If the `fasttext` executable is not on PATH, set `FASTTEXT_CMD`.
  On Windows, `scripts/fasttext.cmd` is auto-detected if present.

1) Install dependencies:
```bash
npm install
```

2) Start the app:
```bash
npm run dev
```

The UI will load while the model boots. The first translation may take a minute.

## UI notes

- Streaming is enabled by default for faster feedback.
- Light/dark theme toggle is in the header.
- The language list is a curated 55-language set in `shared/languages.js` and can be edited if needed.
- Source language supports `Auto detect` when fastText is configured.
- Input length is capped based on the 2K token context window to avoid truncated outputs.
- Long text mode splits large inputs into sentence-sized chunks, streams each chunk, and merges the results.
- Prompt mode defaults to plain text instructions for compatibility; set `LLAMA_PROMPT_MODE=structured` to use the model's structured template.

## Environment options

- `LLAMA_HOST` (default: `127.0.0.1`)
- `LLAMA_PORT` (default: `8033`)
- `LLAMA_MODEL` (default: `mradermacher/translategemma-4b-it-GGUF:Q6_K`)
- `LLAMA_SERVER_CMD` (default: `C:\llama cpp\llama-server.exe` on Windows if it exists, otherwise `llama-server`)
- `LLAMA_SERVER_ARGS` (optional override for all args)
- `LLAMA_SERVER_URL` (optional override for the full base URL)
- `PORT` (default: `3000`)
- `LLAMA_PROMPT_MODE` (default: `plain`, set to `structured` to send the TranslateGemma structured content payload)
- `NEXT_TELEMETRY_DISABLED` (default: `1` to avoid Next.js version checks in offline mode)
- `LLAMA_CONTEXT_TOKENS` (default: `2048`)
- `LLAMA_MAX_OUTPUT_TOKENS` (default: `512`)
- `LLAMA_PROMPT_OVERHEAD_TOKENS` (default: `120`)
- `FASTTEXT_CMD` (default: `fasttext`)
- `FASTTEXT_MODEL` (default: `models/lid.176.bin`)

## Translation contract

The adapter sends the TranslateGemma-specific chat template:
- `role: "user"`
- `content`: list of exactly one item
- item includes `type`, `source_lang_code`, `target_lang_code`, and `text`

## Image translation (not enabled yet)

The model supports image inputs, but the adapter and UI are text-only until
llama.cpp accepts the vision projector and image payloads end-to-end.
Once available, the adapter can pass `type: "image"` with a `url` payload.

## Known limits

- Text-only mode; image translation is not wired yet.
- 2K context window is enforced; long inputs must be chunked.
- Output cleanup strips model control tokens and common prefixes; if a case is missed, adjust `shared/sanitize.js`.
- Prompt mode defaults to `plain`; use `LLAMA_PROMPT_MODE=structured` if your llama.cpp build supports the structured template.
